# Declarations


## Storage class specifiers
example of static being used to make the variable i invisible to other outside the scope of the function.

the variable is not stored on the stack, but among the global variables which preserves its value between function calls. it will have a fixed memory location. the lifetime of the static variable extends the lifetime of the program.
```c
int fun(int a, int b){

    static int i;// only initialized once, and to 0

    if (!i){
        init();
        i = 1;
    }
    // more stuff
}
```
static variables can only be set to constant values. This is  since they are initialized at compile time, before the program is executed. 

- `&x` will here be the `stack_pointer + offset` which will be known at runtime, but not when the program is being compiled. The compiler must be able to determine the value that the static variable is being set to without executing code.
```c
int fun(int x){

    static int a = 12; // ok
    static int* b = &a; // ok, since address of a is known at compile time and is constatnt
    static int* c = &x; // error, since x is not a constant
}
```

# Storage class specifiers: `Extern`
- The extern variable says to the compiler  `Go outside my scope and you will find the definition of the variable that I declared.`

we basically have to tell the compiler that the variable is defined outside of the current scope.
extern is used to share variables and functions between files in a larger program. This allows different parts of the program to access and modify the same variable or function.

### `extern` variables
the keyword `extern` is used to declare a variable that is defined in another file or scope. you do not allocate storage for the variable, you are simply declaring its existence.
```c
// File1.c
int x = 10;  // Definition with initialization

// File2.c
extern int x;  // Declaration without initialization
```


### `extern` functions
functions are implicitly declared as extern, so you do not need to use the keyword `extern` when declaring a function.
```c
int foo(int arg1, char arg2);

// The compiler treats it as:
extern int foo(int arg1, char arg2);
```


# Storage class specifiers: `auto & register`
- auto is completely useless in C, since all variables are auto by default. 

auto still exists because on of the key values of c is that changing languge standards should not break existing code.

- register is also storage class specifier which is pretty pointless. it is used to tell the compiler that a variable should be stored in a register instead in the CPU, since it used a lot.
- you can have a pointer to a register variable, since registers are not addresable.

this is not very needed because optimized compilers will do these choices better.

# Type class specifiers: `typedef`
- typedef is used to create an alias for an existing data type.
```c
typedef int Coordinate; // 'Coordinate' is now an alias for 'int'

Coordinate x, y; // Equivalent to 'int x, y;'
```

abstracting away the need to type`struct`
```c
// Without typedef
struct Point {
    int x;
    int y;
};

struct Point p1; // You need to use 'struct' keyword

// With typedef
typedef struct {
    int x;
    int y;
} Point;

Point p2; // Now you can declare variables directly as 'Point'
```




# Type class specifiers: `Enum`
enum is a bit like `#define` but the debugger understands it. an enum declares named int constants

the variabel car can be used where an int can be used. for example like an array index.
```c
//           0     1        2
enum colors {RED, GREEN, BLUE};

//      0     100  101
enum a {a, b = 100, c};
typedef enum {PORSCHE, MERCEDES, BMW} car_t;
car_t car = PORSCHE;
```

# Type class specifiers: `Union`

## Union
a union is like a struct but can only hold one of the variables in its fields at a time. the size of the union is the size of the largest field. The member of a union are all the possible values that the union can hold.

- the members share the same memory location

```c
union Data {
    int i;
    float f;
};
```
### use cases
1. `type-pruning`:Sometimes, unions are used to interpret the same data in different ways, known as type-punning
2. `Variant Data Types`: If a variable can hold one of several different types, a union can be a good way to manage this, especially in low-level programming like embedded systems.


# flexible array members

### BAD example of of flexible array members
this is a bad exmaple since it uses more memory than necessary.

to access an element in the array, we first have to access the struct our struct pointer is pointing to, then the array that the array pointer is pointing to.

- if we can make the s pointer point directly to the array, we can save memory and allow for less computation.
```c
struct s {
    size_t n;
    int* a; // we want to save the array directly here
};

struct s* = malloc(sizeof(struct s));
s->n = n;
s->a = malloc(n * sizeof(int));
```

### optmization through the struct-hack
here we allocate more memory than the struct actaully need. the extra memory is for our array. we can then access the array directly through the struct pointer.

- everyone "knows" this works, but tools might complain because we're indexing our array out of bounds.
```c
struct s {
    size_t n;
    int a[1]; 
};

struct* s;
size_t size;

size = sizeof(struct s) + (n - 1) * sizeof(int);
s = malloc(size);
s->a[n-1] = 119; // debuggers will complain, but it works
```

### flexible array member
- the last member of a struct can be an array of unspecified length. This is called a flexible array member. this means there can only be one such member, and it can't be the only member of a struct.

we can in this way avoid storage for an extra pointer, and we avoid the struct-hack.

- only works for heap-allocated structs.
```c
struct s {
    size_t n;
    int a[]; // flexible array member
};

struct* s;
size_t size;

size = sizeof(struct s) + (n) * sizeof(int);
s = malloc(size);
s->a[n-1] = 119; // OK
```

# Type qualifiers

## const
- we tell the compiler that a certain variable is read only through the keyword `const`.
a const variabel can't be changed after intilization.

- const is not a constant, but a read-only variable. it is not a compile-time constant, but a runtime constant.

a pointer to a const int has to to be a const as well. it's because the pointer should not be able to change the value of the const int.
```c
const int x = 10;
const int* p = &x; // pointer to a constant int
```

## volatile
- volatile tells the compiler that the value of a variable should be read every time it is used, because it can change at any time without any action being taken by the code. 

when the compiler optimizes the while-loop, it will only look at the logic-statement once (if volatile is not used) since x doesn't change value in the loop. reading the x value every time in the loop is a waste of time, is a waste of time because the value of x is not changed in the loop.

`this is where the volatile keyword comes in`: it tells the compiler that the value of x can change at any time, so it should read every time it is used, to see if it has changed.

```c
#include <singnal.h>

volatile int x;

void handler(int sig){  // changes the value of x when ctrl+c is pressed
    x = 0;
}

int main(){

    x = 1;
    signal(SIGINT, handler);

//reads the value of x every time when x is volatile
//reads the value of x only once when x is not volatile
    while (x)
            ;
}
```


## restrict
- the restrict keyword is used to indicate that a pointer is the only reference to the object it points to within the scope of a specific block of code

 Läs mer i boken


# type conductors
- there are 3 type constructors
1. `pointers`
2. `arrays`
3. `functions`

we find the type of a variable by starting at the pointer. looking for a left parenthesis, if we find that, we consume it. otherwise we look to the left.

```c
int(*a[12]) (int);
```