# pipelining
pipelining is a technique to speed up the execution of instructions by overlapping the execution of multiple instructions.

- the key is that by having simple steps, each step can be fast.

### to execute an instruction:
1. instruction fetch   
2. instruction decode
3. execute
4. memory access
5. write back

the idea is that we can have 5 instructions excuting in parallel, each in a different stage of the pipeline.

- this would make the computer 5 times faster, but there are some problems with this.

## RISC
- `reduced instruction set computer`

risc is a class of computer processor architectures that are designed with a small set of simple instructions, rather than a more specialized set of complex instructions. This it is to make it easier to pipeline the instructions.

- the drawback is that RISC processors require more instructions to execute the same program as a CISC processor.

the goal is however that the parallel execution of the instructions will make up for the increased number of instructions.

`load-store architecture` is common in RISC computers, it mean that all operands must be fetched from memory using load instructions, and written back using store instructions.


## a software crisis and the semantic gap
- in the 1960s the hardware was really expensive compared to the software. This switch in the 1970s, and the software became more expensive than the hardware.

`One bad idea` from the 70s was that current computers are bad, because there is a semantic gap which makes it very difficult to translate high level languages to machine code. So instead of creating RISC processors, there was a trend to make more complicated computers.

### reasons for complex intructions:
1. reduce the code-size
2. smaller code-size leads to fewer instruction cache misses
3. the product line competed with having as complex instructinos as possible.


## IBM 801
- the ibm 801 is considered to be the first modern RISC-processor

the 801 was an experimental processing unit developed by IBM in the 1979, where they started from scratch. This meant they didn't care about backwards compatibility. 

They could create a copmletely new instruction set.

- no complex instructions that reduce the clock-cycle
- intended to be used with high-level languages and optmimizing compilers


# The power architecture
- the ibm 801 was a research prototype and was commercialized as the ibm power architecture.

## Power registers
- 32 general registers (32/64-bit)
- 32 floating point registers (64-bit)
- 32 vector registers (128-bit)
- a number of special purpose registers like:
   
    storing a loop iteration count to avoid i++, i < n
    
    function call return address

- fixed point exception registers

the `link register` is used to store the return address of a function call. it is written implicitly by the `bl` instruction:
```c
// branch and link

bl printf /* function call */
```

`counter register` can be used to store a loop iteration count, which is faster than using general purpose registers, compare and branch.

`condition registers`

# IBM ej klar

# function call conventions
